# Introduction

## Preface

Dashboards are everywhere, and the sad truth is that you'll never find one that gives you a 'single pane of glass' into your environment. Many tools and systems come with dashboard baked in and many others are designed to work with off the shelf dashboards such as [Kibana][kibana] or [Grafana][grafana]. However you'll always find yourself in need of that custom dashboard to check on 'metric x' once a month, or to automatically generate a report for a manager who wants something more simplified.

## Who should read this book

This book is primarily aimed at linux system administrators and system engineers, however it would also be useful to anyone working in IT who is willing to write a little code to see a custom dashboard.

## What is 'dashboarding'?

Throughout this book I will be referring to 'dashboarding' as 'the act of writing a simple script to generate some data, and a simple web page to display it'. Note the use of the word 'simple' in that definition, dashboarding is not an alternative to generating a dashboard from centralized logs on an ELK stack or a grafana dashboard showing monitoring metrics being collected by collectd. Dashboarding should be quick to do.

## When should you use 'dashboarding'?

Imagine a scenario where a manager walks up to your desk and asks you for a report on the number of servers you have in your environment, when each one was last updated and the packages installed on them. You open your terminal and write a quick bash script to ssh into each server and interrogate the package manager for the information you require. You direct the output of your script into a text file and attach it to an email to the manager. The manager emails you back thanking you and asks if you can send him this information every month. You create a quick cron job to run your script and email the output to the manager. Job done!

If this sounds familiar then I'm willing to bet that you've done this more than once, and that you receive quite a few automated emails from various servers and systems. I would also imagine that the manager you are sending automated emails to has stopped paying attention to them, they have become white noise.

This is a good situation for a dashboard. Instead of directing the output of the script to an email we can send it to a file on a web server. Then using a little bit of HTML and JavaScript we can create a nice web page to display the data.

## Writing an open source book on GitHub

I have decided to not only release this book as open source under a Creative Commons license but to write it in the open on GitHub. As it is the platform it will ultimately release the book on I might as well use it to write the book too. I'll be using issues to plan out the book and pull requests to incorporate changes from whomever I rope in as editor.

## Navigating this book

This book is being written as a collection of markdown files. Each chapter will have its own folder will be divided into topics which are stored as markdown files within those folder. Chapters and topics will be numbered so they will sort correctly alphabetically, therefore to read the book just start at the top and work your way down.

## Acknowledgments

TBC

[grafana]: http://grafana.org/
[kibana]: https://www.elastic.co/products/kibana
